Here we report, for the first time, that a pupillary light response (PLR) is in part preparatory: When you prepare an eye movement towards a bright (or dark) stimulus, the pupil prepares to adjust its size to the impending luminance change before the eyes set in motion. This finding contrasts with the traditional view that the PLR is a low-level reflex to light, and shows that the PLR is tightly linked to visual attention and eye movements [see also @Binda2013Bright;@Mathôt2013Plos;@Naber2013Osc].

Preparation has two, more-or-less distinct effects on the PLR. Firstly, if preparation was possible, we observed that pupil size was slightly affected by the luminance of a newly fixated surface within 50 ms after a saccadic eye movement (%FigMain::b). Given that it takes 250 to 500 ms for the pupil to respond to luminance changes [@Ellis1980], this initial response is clearly due to preparation. This initial response is followed some time later by a more pronounced response, which we might call the 'full' PLR. Preparation reduces the latency of this 'full' PLR by about 100 ms (based on model estimates of `t0`, shown in %FigFit). This latency reduction closely matches the finding that a covert shift of attention precedes every eye movement by approximately 100 ms [@Deubel2008Time;@RolfsCarrasco2012]. We suggest that this pre-saccadic shift of attention drives the anticipatory PLR: The pupil prepares to adjust its size at the moment that attention shifts towards the target of an upcoming eye movement.

The preparatory effects on the PLR that we report here have important implications for theories of visual attention and eye-movement preparation. More specifically, the earlies luminance-related changes in pupil size are presumably due to preparation that occurred as much as 200 ms prior to the eye movement [again, assuming a latency of about 250 ms, cf. @Ellis1980]. In turn, this suggests that attention may gradually begin to shift to the target of an upcoming saccade, much more than 100 ms before saccade onset, but that this may not be readily detected using psychophysical behavioral measures [e.g., @RolfsCarrasco2012]. An interesting avenue for future research would therefore be to investigate the extent to which these very early preparatory PLR effects also arise when participants are discouraged to endogenously attend to the saccade target, for example by using a dual task that requires participants to covertly attend to one location, while making an eye movement to another [cf. @Deubel2008Time]. More generally, we believe that pupillometry is a powerful new tool to investigate the dynamics of peri-saccadic visual attention.

Strikingly, our results suggest that a PLR is elicited when you prepare an eye movement towards a bright (or dark) stimulus, even when that stimulus is changed before being brought into central vision. More specifically, in the Swap condition (%FigMain::c), the brightness of the display reversed polarity during the eye movement. Consequently, when preparing an eye movement towards a bright target, the eyes landed on a dark target, and vice versa. Our crucial finding is that the pupil initially responded to the pre-saccadic brightness of the target. Again, this initial response occurred almost immediately after the eye movement (±19 ms after saccade offset), which strongly suggests that it was preparatory in nature.

Our results complement recent studies that have demonstrated various high-level effects on the PLR. Most relevant here is the recent finding that the PLR is modulated by covert visual attention [@Binda2013Bright;@Mathôt2013Plos;@Naber2013Osc]: Merely attending to a bright stimulus from the corner of your eye is sufficient to trigger a pupillary constriction. Another striking result, which dates back almost a century, but has recently been re-discovered, comes from binocular rivalry. In these studies, stimuli of different brightness are presented to each eye [@LoweOgle1966;@Fahle2011;@Naber2011;@Harms1937]. The crucial finding is that the pupil constricts when the brighter stimulus dominates awareness, relative to when the darker stimulus dominates. This shows that the PLR reflects visual awareness, rather than objective luminance. A related finding is that the pupil constricts when viewing images that are interpreted as being very bright, such as pictures of the sun, compared to equiluminant control images [@Binda2013Sun;@Naber2013Content;@LaengEndestad2012]. Finally, and perhaps most strikingly, merely thinking about a bright stimulus induces a pupillary constriction [@Laeng2014Imaginary]. Taken together, these very different studies converge on a very similar conclusion: The PLR is not just a reflexive response to light, but reflects what we (covertly) attend to, what we are aware of, how we interpret visual input, and even what we think about. Our study complements these findings by showing that a PLR to a to-be-fixated stimulus is prepared before the eyes actually set in motion. From a functional point of view, preparation allows the pupillary response to track the rapid changes in input brightness that are caused by eye movements, despite being a relatively slow response.

In conclusion, we have shown that the pupillary light response (PLR) prepares for the brightness of stimuli before they are brought into central vision. We have suggested that this finding is linked to the pre-saccadic shift of attention [@Deubel1996Common;@Kowler1995]: The pupil prepares a light response as soon as attention shifts towards the target of an upcoming eye movement.
