# Introduction

You need light in order to see. The more light enters the eye, the easier it is to distinguish visual signal from the intrinsic neural noise of the visual system [e.g., @BurnsBaylor2001]. Therefore, pupillary dilation improves the signal-to-noise ratio of vision, and consequently improves visual acuity, by increasing the amount of light that enters the eye.

However, large pupils also carry disadvantages. As first suggested by @Denton1956, large pupils are detrimental to vision, because various optical distortions are most pronounced when a large surface of the eye's lens is exposed [see also @Campbell1960;@Woodhouse1975Grating]. The optimal size of the pupil therefore depends on the amount of light that is available. In darkness, visual acuity is limited mostly by the scarcity of light, and the pupil dilates to increase light influx. In brightness, even a small pupil lets through sufficient light, and the pupil constricts to reduce the optical abberations that result from the eye's imperfections. Among other things [e.g., @WoodhouseCampbell1975], the pupillary light response (PLR) is therefore a mechanism to optimize visual acuity under varying levels of ambient lighting.

Given its presumed function, it is odd that the PLR is such a slow response. Numerous studies have shown that it takes 250 - 500 ms for the pupil to respond to a luminance change [@Ellis1981;@FeinbergPodolak1965]. Because humans make about three eye movements per second [@Rayner1998], the PLR would therefore seem to 'lag behind': When you make an eye movement towards a bright object, your pupil constricts only after your gaze has already shifted elsewhere.

So how can the PLR serve a useful purpose if it is too slow to keep up with your eye movements? One intriguing possibility is that the effective latency of the PLR is far lower than previous research has suggested. Most of our understanding of the PLR is based on passive-viewing studies, in which the pupillary response to a suddenly presented stimulus is recorded [e.g., @Ellis1981;@FeinbergPodolak1965; @Crawford1936; @Loewenfeld1958]. Passive viewing is an unnatural situation for our action-wired nervous system, because it decouples perception from action. This contrasts with real-life visual perception, in which what you see is largely a consequence of your own actions [i.e. 'active vision', cf. @FindlayGilchrist2003;@Mathôt2011Phil]. For example, if you perceive an object, this is generally because you have made an eye movement to bring that object into central vision, and not because the object has suddenly appeared out of nowhere. The same is true for the PLR: Although a PLR may occasionally be elicited by an unexpected stimulus, such as a light that is switched on, it will usually result from an eye movement towards a bright stimulus. However, the PLR in the context of self-generated movement has received little or no attention.

Here we test the hypothesis that the PLR is, at least in part, anticipatory: As soon as you prepare an eye movement towards a stimulus, the pupil starts to adjust its size to the brightness of the to-be-fixated stimulus, already before the eyes set in motion. Given the traditional assumption that the PLR is a low-level reflex to light, the suggestion that it may be elicited by anticipation, and thus in the absence of direct visual stimulation, seems implausible. (The fact that arousal affects pupil size in a non-visual way is well established [@LaengSirois2012;@Loewenfeld1958]. But this phenomenon is distinct from the PLR, which is a purely luminance-related pupillary response.) However, there are two main findings that support this prediction very strongly.

Firstly, every saccadic eye movement is preceded by a covert shift of attention [@Deubel1996Common; @Kowler1995;@Hoffman1995;@Castet2006]: If you prepare an eye movement towards a stimulus, you will perceive that stimulus more clearly, already before the eye movement is executed. The time course of this pre-saccadic shift of attention has recently been investigated in detail by @RolfsCarrasco2012. In their experiment, the primary task of the participant was to make a saccadic eye movement towards a target. Just before or after the saccade was initiated, a slightly tilted Gabor patch was briefly presented at the location of the saccade target. The participant's secondary task was to indicate the orientation and contrast of this Gabor patch, relative to a reference stimulus. This secondary task provided a measure of discrimination performance and visual sensitivity, which are classic hallmarks of attention [e.g., @CarrascoLing2004;@Posner1980Orient]. The crucial finding was that performance on both measures of attention gradually improved at the saccade target from about 100 ms prior to the onset of the eye movement [see also @Deubel2008Time].

Secondly, we and others have recently shown that a PLR can be elicited by a covert shift of attention [@Binda2013Bright; @Mathôt2013Plos]. In our experiment, which was a variation of the Posner cueing paradigm [@Posner1980Orient], participants fixated on the center of a display that was divided into a bright and a dark half, separated by a central gray band. Participants identified a target stimulus, which was presented on the left or right side of the display, on a bright or dark background. Just before the target appeared, its probable location was indicated by a cue. Participants covertly (i.e. without making an eye movement) shifted their attention to the cued side, in anticipation of the target. Crucially, the pupil constricted when participants covertly attended to the bright side of the display, relative to when they attended to the dark side. This showed that a PLR is elicited by covertly attending to a bright object, even when eye position is controlled and visual input is kept constant.

In sum, every eye movement is preceded by a covert shift of attention [@Kowler1995;@Deubel1996Common], and a covert shift of attention elicits a PLR [@Mathôt2013Plos;@Binda2013Bright]. Together, these findings suggest that when you make an eye movement towards a bright (or dark) stimulus, the pre-saccadic shift of attention should elicit a PLR already before the eyes set in motion. Given the time course of the pre-saccadic shift of attention, which precedes eye movements by about 100 ms [@RolfsCarrasco2012;@Deubel2008Time], we can make an even more specific prediction: When making eye movements, anticipation should reduce the latency of the PLR by approximately 100 ms, relative to a passive-viewing condition. A secondary prediction is that a PLR should be elicited when you prepare an eye movement to a bright (or dark) stimulus, even when this stimulus is removed during the eye movement and therefore never brought into central vision.

In the present experiment, participants made a saccadic eye movement from a central fixation dot towards a small target on the left or right side of the display (for details, see [Methods]). After the eye movement, the background of the target was always either bright or dark. Therefore, in all conditions we expected a robust PLR, reflected by a relative pupillary constriction to brightness and a relative dilation to darkness. Crucially, we manipulated whether the target luminance during eye-movement preparation matched the target luminance after the eye movement, by changing the display as soon as the eyes set in motion. In other words, we manipulated whether the target luminance could be anticipated during eye-movement preparation. In the Onset condition, the target background was initially gray and turned bright (or dark) as soon as the eyes set in motion (%FigParadigm::c). This condition is analogous to passive viewing in the sense that the target luminance could not be anticipated. In contrast, in the Constant condition, the target background was dark/ bright from the start of the trial (%FigParadigm::a) and could therefore be anticipated during eye-movement preparation. Therefore, we expected that the latency of the PLR would be reduced in the Constant condition, relative to the Onset condition. Finally, in the Swap condition, the luminance of the target background reversed polarity when the eyes set in motion: Bright became dark and vice versa (%FigParadigm::b). In this condition, we expected that pupil size would initially reflect the pre-saccadic target luminance (i.e. an anticipatory response), followed later by an opposite response to the post-saccadic target luminance.

%--
figure:
 id: FigParadigm
 source: FigParadigm.svg
 caption: Schematic experimental paradigm. a) An example of a Land-on-Dark Constant trial, in which the luminance of the target background could be anticipated during eye-movement preparation. b) An example of a Land-on-Bright Swap trial, in which a dark target background was anticipated during eye-movement preparation, but the eyes landed on a bright background. c) An example of a Land-on-Dark Onset trial, in which no luminance change was anticipated during eye-movement preparation, but the eyes landed on a dark background. The display change occurred as soon as the onset of an eye movement was detected. Saccade direction (left/ right) was varied randomly.
--%
