## Participants, software, and apparatus

Eight observers (six naive participants and two authors; seven women; age range 20-30 years) participated in the experiment. Participants provided written informed consent. The experiment was conducted with approval of the *Comité d'Ethique de l'Université de Provence* (currently Aix-Marseille University). The right eye was recorded with an EyeLink 1000 (SR Research, Mississauga, Canada, ON), a video-based eye tracker sampling at 1000 Hz. Stimuli were presented on a 21" ViewSonic pf227f CRT monitor (1024 x 768 px, 100 Hz) with OpenSesame [@MathSchreij2012] using the PsychoPy [@Peirce2007] back-end. Data, materials, and supplementary analyses are available from
<https://github.com/smathot/materials_for_P0001>.

## Stimuli and procedure

Before the experiment, a nine-point eye-tracker calibration was performed. Before each trial, a single-point re-calibration ('drift correction') was performed.

%--
figure:
 id: FigParadigm
 source: FigParadigm.svg
 caption: Schematic experimental paradigm. a) An example of a Land-on-Dark Constant trial, in which the pupil prepares for, and lands on, a dark target background. b) An example of a Land-on-Dark Swap trial, in which the pupil prepares for brightness, but lands on darkness. c) An example of a Land-on-Dark Onset trial, in which the pupil prepares for an intermediate (unchanged) luminance, but lands on darkness. The display change occurred during the saccade.
--%

Each trial started with the presentation of three dim green dots (14.7 cd/m^2^; 0.1°) at the display center and 10.0° to the right and left of the center (see %FigParadigm). Participants fixated on the central dot. In the Constant and Swap conditions, the background was divided into a bright (88.5 cd/m^2^) and a dark (0.2 cd/m^2^) half, separated by a central luminance-gradient (10.0° wide). In the Onset condition, the background was uniformly gray (20.8 cd/m^2^). After 3 s, an auditory cue, *gauche* (left) or *droite* (right), instructed a leftwards or rightwards saccade. Saccades were detected on-line when horizontal gaze position deviated more than 2.9° from the central dot for at least two consecutive gaze samples. The target dot remained visible throughout the trial. The central and non-target dots were removed when a saccade was detected. Participants were instructed to maintain fixation on the target dot until trial end.

Upon saccade detection, one of three things happened. In the Constant condition, the display did not change (%FigParadigm::a). Therefore, pre-saccadic preparation should result in a reduction of PLR latency. In the Swap condition, the dark side of the screen turned bright and vice versa (%FigParadigm::b). Therefore, preparation should result in a brief (seemingly) inverse PLR, reflecting the PLR's preparatory component. In the Onset condition, the uniformly gray display was divided into a bright and a dark half (%FigParadigm::c). In this condition, preparation was impossible (or, rather, there was preparation for no change), because the central dot and the saccade target were (initially) on the same gray background. The trial ended 3 s after saccade detection.

Landing luminance (Land-on-bright, Land-on-Dark) and Condition (Constant, Swap, Onset) were equiprobable and randomly mixed within blocks. Saccade direction (Left, Right) was fully randomized. The experiment consisted of 360 trials across 10 blocks, and lasted approximately 90 minutes.

## Attributing pupillary responses to preparation

There is a considerable delay between the moment that preparation of a PLR starts, and the moment that the iris muscles set in motion to change the size of the pupil. Because of this delay, even when preparation starts before saccade execution, the first pupil-size changes may occur only during or after the saccade. Therefore, we need a criterion to unambiguously attribute pupillary responses to pre-saccadic preparation, even if these pupillary responses occur during or after the saccade. More specifically, we need to know the first moment at which the pupil could, in theory, respond to events that occurred at the time of the saccade. This is particularly important in our experiment, because our conditions differ in the display change that occurs during the saccade, which may affect pupil size [e.g., @BarburHarlowSahraie1992]. A lower bound for the pupillary response latency is 220 ms [@Ellis1981]+[; visual change triggers a much slower response, @Gamlin1998]. Thus, we consider the first 220 ms after the display change to reflect preparatory activity.

## Data analysis and selection criteria

Each trial was divided into three epochs: the baseline epoch, spanning the 100 ms prior to the presentation of the auditory cue; the pre-saccade epoch, from the cue until the detection of the saccade; and the post-saccade epoch, from the detection of the saccade until the end of the trial, or until another saccade was made (i.e. when participants broke fixation before the end of the trial). We analyzed pupil surface relative to the mean pupil size during the baseline epoch [cf. @Mathôt2013Plos]. Missing data during blinks was reconstructed, where possible, using cubic-spline interpolation [@Math2013Blinks]. No signal smoothing was applied.

For the analysis, we used the EyeLink saccade-detection algorithm (velocity threshold: 35 °/s; acceleration threshold: 9500 °/s^2^), and considered the first saccade that was larger than 1.8°. Saccades were executed on average 543.6 ms (SD = 187.4) after the auditory cue. Off-line verification of timing, based on a trigger that was sent to the eye tracker immediately after the display change, showed that the display change occurred  27.09 ms (SD = 3.906) after saccade onset and 27.55 ms (SD = 7.852) before saccade offset. In other words, the display change fully occurred during the saccade, even allowing for the monitor's phosphor persistence [< 10 ms, @WangNikolic2011] and refresh cycle.

Trials were excluded when saccades were executed before the cue or in the wrong direction (8.4%), when saccade latency was less than 50 ms or more than 2000 ms (0.5%), when the display change did not occur during the saccade (4.9%; per off-line verification), or when blinks occurred and could not be reconstructed (4.5%). 2350 trials (81.4%) remained for further analysis. There were no notable condition differences in saccade size (Constant: 9.74°, Onset: 9.51°, Swap: 9.70°), proportion of discarded trials (Constant: 18.5%, Onset: 17.8%, Swap: 18.9%), or fixation stability during the post-saccade epoch (mean standard deviation of horizontal gaze position; Constant: 0.28°, Onset: 0.35°, Swap: 0.31°).
